Hello everyone!

I have been an avid fan of Mindustry for a bit now, and I wanted to like logic, but always found it very opaque. The
problem with logic, as I see it, is that it is very low-level, closer to assembly than to a "real" programming language.

Let me introduce you to Mindcode, an alternative to Mindustry Logic.

The following code, an extract from the "Bind a single unit of a specified type" sample, illustrates some properties of
Mindcode that I particularly like:

    type = @poly
    while found == false {
        while @unit === null {
            ubind(type)
            if @unit.flag == 0 {
                flag(FLAG)
                found = true
            }
        }
    }

compiles to:

    set type @poly
    jump 13 notEqual found false 
    jump 12 notEqual @unit null 
    ubind type 
    sensor tmp2 @unit @flag 
    jump 10 notEqual tmp2 0 
    ucontrol flag FLAG 0 0 0 0 
    set found true 
    set tmp5 true 
    jump 11 always 0 0 
    set tmp5 null 
    jump 2 always 0 0 
    jump 1 always 0 0 
    end 

Mindcode supports many high-level constructs: while loops, inline calculations, the ternary operator, and comments.

Some time ago, I saw a Mindustry Logic script here that ran over a region and upgraded any copper conveyors to titanium
ones. Well, I wrote a version of that script, in Mindcode. It implements a finite state machine to handle the
complexity. The Mindcode version is 166 lines, including a dozen or more lines of comments, while the the Mindustry
Logic version of that script is 241 lines of dense code, with no comments. I encourage you to view the upgrade copper
conveyors to titanium sample script.

Another sample, this time using a linked memory cell:

    cell1[BUILD_Y] += cell1[DY]

This compiles to:

    read tmp0 cell1 BUILD_Y 
    read tmp1 cell1 DY 
    op add tmp2 tmp0 tmp1 
    write tmp2 cell1 BUILD_Y 
    end 

In the extract above, `BUILD_Y` and `DY` are constants, defined elsewhere, that indicate the memory location where we store
our internal state.

Mindcode is free for use, and does not track users. The source code you submit for compilation is kept around, so that I
can look at the source code and see areas for improvement. The source code also allows me to look at the syntax errors
that were generated, so that I can fix them.

If you want to contact me, please leave a message here, or put a comment in your Mindcode with my name, francois!

## CAVEATS

Of course, this is the first ever version! Some things that are missing or are not finished at this time are:

* Radar, Unit Radar and Unit Locate are uninplemented
* Draw and Drawflush are unimplemented
* Many optimizations are still possible, when generating Mindustry Logic
* Some form of user manual would be nice!

I intend to keep on working on this, and open-sourcing the code in the coming days. If you're interested, Mindcode is
implemented in Java 11, using ANTLR4. It was a fun opportunity for me to learn some ANTLR4, as well as walking abstract
syntax trees. It was a fun exercise!
